Welcome to the Superhumaniz podcast. I'm
your host, Ariana Summer, and today
we're diving into one of the most
paradigmshifting conversations in modern
medicine, the metabolic theory of
cancer. For decades, we've been told
that cancer is primarily a genetic
disease, a matter of unlucky mutations
that require aggressive pharmaceutical
interventions.
But what if that's only part of the
story? What if cancer is fundamentally a
metabolic disease, a disorder of
cellular energy production that we can
address through diet, lifestyle, and
targeted metabolic therapies? This isn't
fringe science. And it's giving patients
new hope and new options beyond the
standard cut, poison, and burn model.
Today, I'm thrilled to welcome Dr.
Denise Warden to the show. Dr. Warden is
a boardcertified naturopathic medical
doctor, researcher, and global health
educator who has dedicated her career to
bridging conventional and alternative
cancer care. She's collaborated with
Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center, served
as CEO of Care Oncology, and she's also
the creator of the seven pillars of
health framework, a comprehensive
approach to resilience that addresses
everything from sleep and gut health to
spiritual well-being. Dr. Warden's motto
is educate, empower, enlighten. And
that's exactly what we're going to do
today. We'll explore the metabolic
theory of cancer, discuss both
prevention and treatment strategies, and
give you a road map for building
resilience at every level.
>> Super humanize
accelerated evolution.
Dr. Donise, what a pleasure to connect
with you today. I'm really excited for
us to have this conversation and yeah,
thank you for making time for us.
>> Oh, it's amazing. I'm glad to be here.
Hope to be of service to everyone.
>> Oh, I know you will. That is foundation
of your work from what I've learned
about you. And that being said, I also
want to start at the very foundation.
Most of us grew up with the idea that
cancer is a genetic disease. It's random
mutations in DNA that then go cause
cells to go rogue. And actually the
entire pharmaceutical industry is built
around targeting these mutations. But
you and researchers like Dr. Thomas Safe
Freed, you argue that this is actually
fundamentally backwards and that cancer
is primarily a metabolic disease and
genetic mutations are downstream
effects, not the root cause. Can you
break this down for us, Dr. Denise? What
does it mean to say cancer is a
metabolic disease?
>> Let's start with maybe 5% might be
genetic, has a big genetic piece, but
even if you have a gene, it doesn't mean
it needs to express. So, we're back to
all the things that you're teaching on
your podcast and those of us saying,
"Listen, we can do things with our diet,
lifestyle, our spirit, our mind and body
getting stressed down. So, just because
5% might have a gene, it doesn't need to
be expressed necessarily. So, what are
the others? What are the others?" And so
we go back to Otto Warberg who won the
Nobel Prize and it was Nobel Prize for
what we're talking about in looking at
mitochondrial health and when that
damage happens what happens to the cells
and is that tied to cancer and our group
and Dr. Seed as you mentioned is one of
them Dr. Dominant Dagustinino. We have a
group of about 80 researchers and
physicians and we have to be researchers
and physicians to be in this group that
we are literally forming right now. The
society for international metabolic
oncology because the science is pointing
in the direction that Otter Worerberg
was and that's what on a PET scan when
it lights up it's a cancer and what is
it lighting up? Why is it lighting up?
Because you put sugar into the dye into
the system and cancer loves sugar. It's
its brain if only fuel and it lights up
because it's voracious. So he was right
in saying he thought there was a link.
Now Dr. Seed and many others are going
forward into saying that cancer is a
mitochondrial disease. That's where we
should be putting our research efforts,
our and that's when I work with patients
and clients all over the world. We're
targeting that with the metabolic
therapies, things that we know that are
helping the mitochondria of the healthy
cells, but also pushing hard against the
growth of the cancer by looking at the
mitochondria and the metabolic health of
the whole person. So, to your point, you
did a beautiful job at the beginning. We
believe we've gone down the wrong path.
Still going down the wrong path. The
research dollars are still going into
genetics to fund medications or
chemotherapies and imunotherapies
targeting genetics. But when I look at
patients and we look at those values,
very few of them have these genetic
markers. So then why are we utilizing
some of those therapies? But I will say
there is a time and a place for chemo,
for surgery, and I never thought I'd say
this, but there's a time and a place for
radiation, for comfort, and for helping.
So, we have to be open to all of it. But
fundamentally, we've gone down the wrong
track in our estimation.
>> Yes. And thank you for pointing that
out, Dr. Donise. I think it's so
important to be open and to look at an
individual, to look at the whole
individual. what's actually happening
here and what you just shared with us
about Dr. Otto Warberg and also what's
called the Warberg effect. They
discovered this for almost a century the
mainstream oncology dismissed this as a
side effect rather than a cause. And for
me it's really it was a revelation when
I learned about this and to actually
reframe it and see it as the central
vulnerability of cancer cells. And I'm
curious in your experience from your
perspective Dr. Denise, why has it taken
so long for this to be taken seriously?
And what changed?
>> It really changed. It was going down the
right direction when Warberg found it
and the research was starting to go
there. But then the Rockefeller
Institute came in. When that happened,
homeopathic hospitals, all the what we
would call today integrative medicine
just got pushed to the side to say we're
going to research science-based only.
And that's where the pharmaceuticals
were developed. So all this got pushed
underneath the rug until recently and
really the book that Tom Seaff freed
wrote Dr. Seaf Freed Metabolic Theory of
Cancer opened this back up and another
book for readers that want to maybe look
into this. It's called Tripping Over the
Truth by Travis Kristofferson. As a
physician, when I read that book, I
said, "That's it. That makes sense.
There's the connections. It shows the
faults. It shows the history and why."
And it's really about the whole
industry. It's the billion dollar,
billions of dollar industry. Everything
is built around this. So we would have
to dismantle everything if we said oops
that was the wrong thing. But people are
starting to look at it now because now
younger people are getting cancer. So if
it's genetic and we have to wait for
those genes to mutate. None of it is
making sense. We've got 20 and 30 and 40
year olds. So we know environment is
part of it which affects the
mitochondria and all the things that
we're talking about. But now there's so
much and if you look at the data, we
really haven't moved the needle much on
helping cancer outcomes since we started
measuring him in the 1970s. So would you
with a business would you say I'm not
really getting better but I'm going to
keep throwing money into the same thing?
we would question it. But it's a very
big lift, heavy lift to change this
paradigm. And but enough of us with real
science, real research, when we can get
more funding, we'll do more. But right
now, funding monies go typically into
those same type of studies
>> that are raised in what we consider
flawed philosophy of.
>> Yes, Dr. Denise. And this is why
conversations like these are so
important. And I want to recap a little
bit of my lay person's understanding if
I understand correctly. So the cancer
cells have damaged or dysfunctional
mitochondria which are the powerhouses
of our cells and
they become metabolically inflexible.
and they become dependent on glutamine
and glucose and which
is also interesting because this is
something we can exploit to our benefit.
Right? Before we get into treatment, I
would love for you to explain to us what
causes this mitochondrial dysfunction in
the first place. What damages the
mitochondria? You already mentioned its
environment, but let's get a deeper
understanding on what's actually
happening in our world today. You you
mentioned younger people are getting
cancer. So what's the deal here?
>> Sure.
>> So we know the environment and those
toxins that we're exposed to. We know
that damages mitochondria, but also so
do antibiotics. We see it. There's ways
to try to protect it if someone has to
be on an antibiotic. But how many times
have your listeners been prescribed an
antibiotic and a doctor gave them talked
to them about NAC or other things that
can help protect from that damage? We
just it's not part of the paradigm yet.
But I would say stress also does when
we're worrying. Some of the stress most
stressed people I know are biohackers
because they're so busy trying to do all
the right things all the time and that
they're stressed on trying to what's my
next stack? What's my next thing to do?
And we have to remember back to what you
talked about, there's two real pathways
that feed cancer cells. Okay? One is the
glucose, which you mentioned. We can do
a lot with that. We can say we got to
change the diet. We put most of our
patients on a ketogenic diet. Highfat,
low protein, not Atkins, not high
protein. You have to do it right if
you're going to do it. But we do that.
But they can still have trouble getting
into ketosis. And because when we're
stressed, we're going to pull it out of
the muscles. We're going to pull it from
other places and still dump glucose into
the system. So that brings us back to
the stress side. We have to address
that. The other big pathway is that
glutamine, glutamate that you're talking
about on this side. One of the big
feeders of that pathway again is stress.
We're trying to find the best blockers
we can for both of those pathways. Some
are repurposed drugs. This is not all
natural medicine that we're talking
about. We've got different molecules
we're looking at now that are looking
good on trying to blot some of these
pathways, but a lot of it for those that
are healthy at the moment and saying, "I
don't want to get cancer." There's
things to think about. But I always go
back to the top. If you're not
addressing the stress, no matter how
good we are at these other pathways of
blocking them, doing all the ketogenic
diet, hyperbaric oxygen, the treatments
I'm sure you're going to want to talk
about in a minute. All of that we can
only get so far if we're still dumping
sugar from the system, those adrenal
glands running cortisol or pulling from
the muscles because you're telling the
body it's in stress and it needs to
survive. It's going to choose survival
in the moment over I need to fight this
cancer.
>> Yes, Dr. Donise. And to circle back real
quick to something you said just a few
minutes ago when you talked about
getting the patients on the ketogenic
diet, highfat,
low protein.
I know from conversations with friends
when this comes up and especially the
ones who are quite focused on a diet
that is rich in animal proteins, they're
like, "Why low protein? Can you break it
down for us, please?" Be able to get
into ketosis. That means that your body
is burning fat and it's making a
different fuel. Instead of the brain and
the body using glucose, now it's using
ketones. By the way, those are far
better, superior, and cleaner fuel for
the brain. That's why it works in
neurological diseases, Parkinson's, MS.
We're learning more and more. So, it's a
clean fuel and to be able to get there,
for the body to produce that certain
things will interfere and high protein
can interfere. Now, everyone's a little
different. We put them on chronometer
and things to be able to say how much
protein can we have because one of the
ways that cancer can kill you is
sarcopenia which is the wasting of the
muscles. So we have to weigh this.
Sometimes I might say okay we're going
to sacrifice being so deep into ketosis
because we need more protein to support
the muscles. So it's always an
individualized personalized program that
should be going on because we're all
different. But the general is higher
fat, lower protein, which doesn't mean
low protein. It means lower than the
fat. And the carbs are really coming
from vegetables because we're really
trying to get rid of the fruits and you
might be able to have a handful of
berries.
>> We're looking at their CGMs. We're
looking at their glucose. And we're
saying, "Okay, you can handle this. You
can handle that. You're in ketosis.
You're doing well. Let's tweak it."
Because we've got to make sure good
nutrition is going too. And a lot of
people that say, "I'm in ketosis,"
they're not doing it right. They're not
measuring. They're not looking at what
they need to. And so, even if it's just
for weight loss, you need to do it right
or it's just another diet. It's just
another stress and the weight will come
back anyway. So, it's got to be
individualized.
>> Yes, for sure. Dr. Donise. on knowing
that it needs to be individualized.
Are there some suggestions you can share
with us or are there certain huristics
for example with regard to measuring
what are your preferred methods?
>> Yeah, right now there's a device called
Keto Mojo and because it's looking at
the glucose and the gl it's looking at
different parameters and what we do is
calculate what's called GKI. Who came up
with that was Dr. Tom Seaffrey because
now we're looking at the glutamate, the
glucose. We're looking at the a bigger
picture than just are you producing
ketones and sometimes people can't get
into ketosis because their blood sugar
is too high. Sometimes they're not
getting there and we have to figure out
why because their glucose is low. So the
GKI is a great way to measure it. The
urine strips, forget it. Don't do it.
They're not measurable. It's not
accurate. That was the only thing we had
to begin with. We have some that you can
blow into once you understand and know
what you're doing. The bio sense, others
that you can say, am I in ketosis? Those
are fairly accurate. You can use just
breath blowing, but you can't do that at
the beginning. We don't think it's the
best. We really like looking for this
GKI number until we get everything
figured out, till we know the diet, we
know the stress, we've got it all,
everybody's doing well, and then still
we're going to want to look at that once
in a while. But and again we've got to
say are we causing more stress by
measuring all this all the time.
>> So at the beginning I tell the patients
look listen give me a couple week look
at it that we're going to measure we're
going to look just relax let's breathe
let's do the things that I'm trying to
teach them to do to help them with their
stress but hang with me until we nail
this down. Then you get to really relax
because you're doing the best that you
can instead of I hope this works or I
hope that works and let me just do
everything that I just heard on social
media or I read about let me just do it
all which is we all know is not the
right way to do it.
>> No. And speaking about stress, can you
share some of your preferred protocols
or methods? And again, this will be
tailor made, of course, to the
individual you're with, but what have
you found can really
>> very quickly relieve people of stress
and especially if it's people who are
used to that state of being stressed.
>> That's right. They don't even know
they're stressed because they haven't
felt this peaceful, parasympathetic,
calm state in a while. They think it's
normal. Their brain waves are up here
really high and fast and incoherent.
They're just a mess and they're going to
sleep like that. And even if they can
stay asleep, they're not getting good
quality sleep because the brain's still
doing this. They're running from the
bear and they're asleep. So the first is
recognition of that there is stress,
what it's doing. I might need to show
them a cortisol. Some people need to see
labs. They need to see data to go, "Oh,
okay. That's not good. Oh, my glucose is
high. I'm not getting it down with all
these things I'm doing. It might be
because I'm stressing. So, you have to
Some people are just ready and they go
just tell me what to do. And others we
have to go slowly. Now, my favorites are
meditation with music because most
people if we say just go meditate and
quiet the brain, they're going to feel
like a miserable failure because they're
just they can't quiet that brain down.
It's just too hard for most at the
beginning. But at the if we can teach
them active meditation, it's breath work
where they breathe in, they hold,
breathe in, they hold. And they've been
taught what this is doing to their body.
What is it? What's the mechanics behind
it and the science behind it and they
go, "Okay, that makes sense." And
teaching them to breathe, teaching them
to meditate. And I will tell you that
music from what I have seen, I've seen
it in real time, is the fastest way to
shift you from one emotional state to
the next. And music that's been prepared
where it's in training the heart and the
brain. It's slowing them down. It's
helping them be more coherent and match
one another. It's very quick on EEGs
with the right kind of music. It
immediately makes a shift. Then they're
able to get into a meditative state.
Sometimes with breath work, sometimes
just listening to guided. We're all
different. We all like different things.
But I like to switch it up. But I by the
end of a visit with a patient, I usually
know what type of stress reduction I
could do. It might just need to be
journaling because there's so religious
belief won't even let them say the word
meditation.
>> Even though I say, "Okay, let's talk
about breath work. Is that okay? No,
that's woo too. Okay,
>> how about journaling? You have to take
each person
>> and then just and I will work with them
with breath work just in the moment and
say now how do you feel
>> after doing that and they'll go oh wow
wow
>> okay they just don't know
>> your audience is well educated you what
they hear from you and what they're
doing they get it so it's not one form
is better than another which one works
for you and music is my favorite and
then you add on meditation breath
whatever it is that you need to do.
>> Yes, thank you for sharing that, Dr.
Donise. And I agree, music is amazing.
It can happen literally within seconds.
And breath, it's for free. We have
access to it. I just last weekend
participated in a somatic breath work
>> session uh of a friend of mine and it
was incredible. It was a group of women
and literally the release one woman was
literally whailing and keening and bless
her for being able to release what she's
carrying and thank her for being a
permission slip to the rest of us women
as well. But that's the power of breath
for you.
>> Yes.
>> And so I'm also interested in speaking
about fats and a high fat diet. What are
your go-tos? What are your preferred
fats? First, I do a food sensitivity
test to see what foods they're allergic
to. So, if I'm going to ask them to eat
a lot of something, I first need to make
sure it's not causing inflammation in
their body. But let's assume that we've
looked at that and that it's all okay.
Avocados, all the good oils, olive oil,
and oils that if they're not cooked,
even olive oil, those are healthy. We
put them on the food after they're
cooked. If you're cooking, you're better
off with lard and other things. This
gets into the whole oil issue, but clean
oils, those that will take high heat if
you're cooking with it. But for us, for
our purposes, we need things. It could
be oily fish, salmon, all the things
that have good naturally occurring
omega-3s. So, it's the good oils,
coconut oil, avocado oil, the walnut
oils, the nut oils, all those kinds of
oils. And again, they're better not
heated, but avocados,
salmon, and then they can they you can
look it up nowadays with AI. What are
the healthiest highfat foods that you
like be able to look at it and then we
really analyze, are you getting enough
of the what we call the macronutrients,
right? The protein, the fat, the fibers,
all that. We got to look and then the
micronutrients. Are we getting enough
selenium? are we getting? So, we it's
your favorite foods because if you put
people into foods they don't like,
they're only going to last so long,
>> right?
>> Start with what doesn't cause harm.
Second, what do you like? Now, let's
deise a plan that's ketogenic. That will
get you there. That's for the cancer
patients. Other people, it's
Mediterranean diet. It can be what they
call a green Mediterranean diet with the
studies are showing now that's green tea
>> on top of it. We know green tea is one
of the a really good cancer fighter for
most patients. There's a lot to look at,
but it's back to nature.
>> Really,
>> no processed foods, lots of junk that
that
>> I hope people are starting to
understand. Buy organic when you can.
Anything that comes in a box or a
package is suspect. If it's direct from
farm, better, but if at least it's
fresh, that's where we want to go.
>> Always. Yes. And you just touched upon
it with regard to the ketogenic
approach. Is this something you would
also recommend for prevention or is that
more of a treatment phase?
>> Yeah, it's great. People ask me this
question all the time and I say, "What
would it hurt if a couple of times a
year for about six weeks you went on a
ketogenic diet?" Because guess what? If
there's some cancer cells floating in
there, you just put a big stress against
them and you lose a few extra pounds in
case you need to or want to. Here's the
good thing about ketogenic. If you don't
need to lose and you don't have that
extra fat, you won't. It helps cancer
patients save their muscle. It's muscle
sparing and saving. So, that does that
for healthy patients, too. Those that
are not having cancer. So, it's not
going to deplete your muscles. And
you're going to think of it like a
detox, even though that word's being
thrown around a lot recently in a lot of
ways. But I look at it a couple times a
year. Why wouldn't we?
>> Yeah, I love that approach.
>> Yeah,
>> that makes a lot of sense. I'm actually
going to look into integrating that.
>> Great.
>> Yeah. And and when we talk about
prevention or also keeping our
mitochondria healthy, one of the most
reliable ways to improve mitochondrial
function is actually exercise. Let's
talk exercise and as I know particular
the highintensity interval training or
resistance training which will stimulate
mitochondrial biogenesis. So, we're
literally creating healthier
mitochondria. And I've read that there's
actually data that shows that it also
reduces cancer risk across multiple
cancer types. And so, from your
perspective, Dr. Donise, what's
happening when we exercise that makes us
more cancer resistant? You just gave a
lot of examples. You just gave you you
said it. So it's an oxidative
antioxidative kind of goes in a cycle
and we know part of our pillars when
someone comes to me with cancer I say
there's going to be some basics
hyperbaric oxygen ketogenic diet and
interval training in whatever way that
they can do it I have to take them where
they're at and probably strength
training as well because they've got to
keep those muscles going in a different
way and then we will choose different
supplements maybe repurpose drugs
according to liquid biopsies and things
data that I gather to say these make
sense and if they're going to be on
chemotherapy or conventional care then I
have to say how do these play together
we're always looking for interaction so
a lot that I have to pull together but
back to your exercise here let me give
this as an example is that keto pet is
still going and Ron Penna who was one of
the co-founders of Quest Nutrition he
sold it but he funded because he's very
much part of our community with low carb
ketogenic
diet and trying to still trying to find
things that help fight cancer in his
labs. And it's this all goodwill that he
does now.
>> It just is giving back. But he funded
Keto Pet. What Keto Pet was, they said,
"All right, we have dogs, canines that
are similar to humans. Obviously, we're
a little bit different, but they're
better than rats. Better." We've got in
the kill shelters many of the dogs that
have these huge tumors and cancers, all
types of cancers. And they went and it
took them a lot of you have to go
through regulations for veterinarian as
well. But they went through it and they
said why not let us try. We're not going
to harm them. They're going to feel
better. We're going to do ketogenic
diet. We're going to do hyperbaric
oxygen. We're going to be doing MRIs to
to show what what is happening here,
what we're doing. And we're going to put
them on treadmills for the interval
training. We're going to figure out what
works best. So it was part of the
protocol with canines which by the way
many of the dogs got adopted. They
shrank their tumors. Some went into
regression, remission and they got
adopted. So that's when those of us in
the clinical world of humans went okay
we need to start thinking about this in
humans to answer you part of the basics
of what needs to be done. You can't just
do ketogenic diet hyperaric oxygen. It
seems at this point and eventually we'll
know with all the data that we're all
collecting that those that are also
doing the interval training hit those
kinds of things do far better. And yes,
there are studies on it. Valter Longo,
all the ones that are doing a longevity.
And here's the beauty. Longevity hacks
are the same hacks that we use for
cancer. They're the same treatments.
People say, "How do you do this?" I
said, "Listen, I work with professional
athletes and stage four cancer patients.
It's personalized and they're pretty
much the same therapies because
anti-aging longevity is anti-cancer. So
the interval is very important. Again,
if I've got somebody in stage four,
they've lost a lot of muscle life to
start when I can't what I can. But I
want them into when we can getting that
part which biochemically we know the
mechanisms of why that works. And I mean
that gosh I can't even begin to imagine.
So somebody who has late stage cancer
has lost a lot of muscle mass, how do
you actually get them started? Yeah. So
just walking or even breath work. Some
of them are at stages that honestly if
they're at late stages and their belief
system is not there and they're doing it
for the family, I say this is probably
you need to go on a cruise with your
family and you need to do something. So
I have to look are they at the right
stage to do it because I have many
patients that are stage four metastasis
is all over but they come in they're
motivated they used to be able to do
things and they want to get back there
again they believe they can. So then we
say okay here's the program what can you
do how many steps can you take now let's
take 10 more tomorrow let's do now let's
go a little faster so sometimes it is
baby steps but even just moving helps
reduce the risk of cardiovascular which
we see a lot in the cancer patients that
have been through conventional care
they've really hurt the heart and some
of them die of heart disease and strokes
and from the from not cancer didn't kill
them it's cardiovascular so very indiv
individualized, but some of my stage
four men, they're on their spin cycle,
they're on their bike. I can't put a lot
of weight on the joints. We just have to
look at, do I need to get them in a pool
so that they can walk to take the weight
off? So, it's very individualized, but
they everyone can do something and just
motivating them and empowering them that
they can do it
>> and they feel better when they do.
>> Oh gosh. I mean that that applies to all
of us and to just go for it and do it
and not only in a situation where it's
literally about life or death, but start
when you're feeling good.
>> That's right.
>> Feeling better. Something that I found
of particular interest is you've
co-authored research on something called
the press pulse strategy for metabolic
cancer therapy. Can you walk us through
this please? Yeah. So it gets
complicated but the big picture is and I
know you got an educated audience but
the big picture is the way I explain it
to patients even is that cancer is
really smart and it will learn. You can
start a chemotherapy and it's working.
It shrank the tumor everything looks
great and it's like everybody says this
is great and all of a sudden it stops
working and we can do the same thing
with natural therapies. It will find a
way around it or it can learn to ignore
it like a vaccine type idea. We have to
fool it. we have to constantly come in
with something new. And we're finding
that even with chemotherapies, they're
finding that lower dose rotated types of
chemo and taking breaks in and out is
better. First, because it may be fooling
the cancer and second because it gives
the body a chance to recover. So even
with hyperbaric, we'll do five days on
and two days off. the body needs a rest
and some of the structural things that
we're looking for happen in that rest
period not during active treatment. So
the studies and what we're seeing is
most things we want to pulse. So
repurpose drugs if it's been vendazol or
something like that it's three days on
four days off. We've got protocols for
these things. So we pulse it. Other
things are called press. We do not let
up. One of those is ketogenic diet. We
don't let up. We don't stop that because
we've seen it too many times. As soon as
we let those carbs and that sugar back
in, all of a sudden we watch it, watch
those tumors come back very quickly and
the cancer markers go. So, we know we
can't let go of that. We've got to stay
on that. Other things you stay on the
stress reduction, the meditation, we
can't let up. That's an everyday. We
don't need to stop that. So, that's the
general idea. Not only does is it harder
on the cancer if we're pulsing certain
things, but it also lets like in
repurposed drugs, we give the liver a
chance to recuperate in between.
>> Yes. And that's actually one of the most
exciting aspects of your work, the use
of repurposed drugs. So the medications
that were developed for other
conditions, but they have anti-cancer
metabolic effects. Metformin comes to
mind which originally was for diabetes
or doxycyc an antibiotic and there's
others but these are often generic
they're inexpensive they have decades of
data safety data and why aren't these
used and standard oncology protocols
what's the resistance and yeah what
what's happening there back to that
table so let me talk about my colleagues
and friends that are traditional
oncologists they went into it for the
right reason they wanted to help people
with cancer answer. Now they're stuck in
a system called standard of care. And if
they step one one bit out of that, they
can lose their license. They can be
fined. They can't step outside of this
box. So even if they're friendly to ward
or they say, "All right, I trust Dr.
Warden. She's not going to interfere
with what I want to do over here, or
we're going to have a conversation about
it. Let's try this because the patient
wants to do this instead of that. Let's
have a truly integrative conversation.
Those physicians, they say, "I don't
know anything about it. I can't
prescribe it. I can't tell you to do
it." Because they have to protect their
license and they're in a box they can't
get out of. It's the system is broken,
not the doctors. So, they can't. It's
too scary to even do it. Plus, they're
overworked. They're tired. They don't
have time to even read the research or
keep up with it. They're hearing about
metabolic and ketogenic diet. At this
point, they've heard about it. Some of
them have heard about the hyperbaric.
They're hearing about some of these
other things from their patients, but
they're going, "I don't know anything
about it." And some say, "If I don't
know about it, don't do it." Others go,
"I don't know, but if you're with
somebody I trust or somebody who knows
what they're doing over there, okay,
this is your call." So, it depends on
the oncologist really. So, they're stuck
and then the patients are stuck in
between wondering what do I do? Who do I
trust? Who do I listen to? That's where
I come in. I'm this mediator to be able
to look at both because like I said,
there's a time and a place for
conventional. Now, sometimes we need to
shrink a tumor quickly because it's
going to kill somebody very quickly. And
sometimes the fastest way is if there is
a medication, a chemo or something that
could get to it faster, it might be
worth thinking about. I'm usually in
favor of surgery because if we've got
something growing in the body that's not
talking to the rest of the body, it's
growing quickly. We get out as many of
those cells as we can because then your
own immune system can get in there and
start working. Now we've got a chance.
The problem with the che the
conventional care that no matter what
they're doing there, they're still
leaving cancer stem cells. So they did
chemo and they said, "Great, look, the
tumor shrank. You're in remission. this
is great. I'll see you in five years.
And then all of a sudden there's a
reoccurrence. And the why reoccurrences
are worse is because those cells that
reoccurred and came back were the ones
that survived the therapy you start
with. They're called stem cells. And
they're more aggressive. They're faster.
They're stronger. And that's why as
people get cancer the second time, if
it's the same way, it's usually a
shorter window that we have to try to
help them.
>> Yeah. So the good news is we believe and
I can't make definitive statements yet
but what we're seeing so far we believe
the metabolic therapies are getting to
the cancer stem cells. So now maybe it's
not going to come back now we've got a
better chance of survival and less
reoccurrence. And the other beauty is
many of the therapies cause or they're
there they help with chemo sensitivity
and radio sensitivity. So if you're
doing radiation and chemotherapy, if
you're doing the metabolic therapies,
you will probably have less side effects
and have better effects and maybe they
can use a lower dose because many times
they have to stop because the patients
are so toxic they're killing them with
the therapy. So they have to stop. But
if they could have gone low dose and had
less side effects, they could have
continued. So it's always a dance. It's
always a swimming around the data and
the science, but we're very excited
about what we can contribute to
conventional medicine, not just saying,
"Look what we've got over here now.
Someday we'd like to think that we could
do it without the harsher toxic things."
I think that's such an excellent
approach, Dr. Denise, and it gives a lot
of hope. talking about therapies.
Something that's fascinating to me is,
and you mentioned it a couple times
before, is the hyperaric oxygen therapy.
And it's fascinating because it seems
counterintuitive. We're taught that
cancer thrives and love oxygen
environment. So then when we're flooding
the body with oxygen, what? So what's
happening there? So let's start with
hyperaric. What it actually does is
drive the oxygen inside the cells. So
that's what it does. When you oxygenate,
cancer cells, they don't like it and
they die. They cannot survive. Cancer
cells can't survive and high oxygen. And
your normal cells do well with that too.
But again, we pulse that. We have a
certain time. It depends on the type of
chamber, hard shells, soft shell.
There's protocols for it to say if
you're in this long, we need to take the
mask off out. And so it's very, we're
still learning a lot. I'm going to say
that we're still learning. But the data
that's coming out of like Dominic
Dagustinino's lab, he's funded by DARPA,
the Department of Defense. He works with
the astronauts, with the Navy Seals. His
science is hard and fast and he's a
hyperbaric and ketogenic expert in what
he's studying. And that's how he got
into the cancer world was because what
he saw that was helping our super
soldiers be faster, stronger, and
better. He saw dying of the cancer cells
dying in these healthy people because we
all have cancer cells. That's what drove
him into the world of being part of what
we are really specifically looking at
oncology. I was just on a big call with
him yesterday. He's part of our
international group. It's oxygen can
work for and against you. We think there
might be a couple types of can cancers
that maybe we should do a different type
of protocol. So, we're still learning.
But I will tell you this, the patients
that do hyperbaric and keto, they fare
better, they feel better, their quality
of life is better, and the oncologists
are going, I don't know what you're
doing over there with Dr. Word, but you
just keep doing it because you are far
out living and far doing better than we
would have expected. We feel confident.
Those of us that are really doing it,
like I said, there's 80 of us that are
hardcore scientists and researchers and
physicians, we know that we're on to
something. We see it over and over
again. But these are case histories. Do
I have long-term big data to give you
double blind placebo? No, not all of it,
but we're starting to get there. And
there is some in the literature, which
you're a sleuth. You're in there and
you're looking at this and you're
finding these papers as we're trying to
come out and do it. But we with those of
us also not just research but clinical.
I know what I'm seeing. I know how the
patients are fairing. And even if I had
one that I just lost three days ago,
he's been with me for almost seven
actually over seven years. He was given
a few weeks to live. Wow. He had a
quality of life riding his bike, doing
his things. He decided to try a new
chemo. And I literally I think that he
got so ill, so sick, we couldn't get him
out of the hospital. But what I will
say, he had a quality of life till the
very end. And that's what I'm seeing. No
matter whether the patient it is their
time, it's the time that they're
supposed to go or they're living far
longer and better or we've got
remission. That's what I see. And I
can't say I would never say I'm going to
cure your cancer. Anyone who says that
to you, I think you should run the other
way. But what I can say, your quality of
life will be far better. And I believe
these are great therapies for us to give
you the best chance that you have.
>> Amen. And that's absolutely beautiful,
Dr. Donise. A few weeks versus seven
years. You know what I think you'll find
interesting though because you bring in
spirituality and science into your group
is that some patients want to know
what's called their prognosis. When they
find out they have cancer and
oncologist, they want to say, "How long
do I have?" Or others go, "Don't tell
me. Do not tell me on the person.
>> But what's interesting, those that do
know that date, they date almost to that
date, right around that date. It could
be 3 months, 6 months, 2 years, 3 years,
5 years. No doctor is that accurate. No
cancer that specific that we know that
we could predict it that closely. So
what is that? That's manifestation.
That's the belief system. I'm going to
die on this date. So, they die and
they're gearing up to it. They stress
about it. They do all the things that we
know feed cancer. So, I tell my patients
that it's up to you whether you want to
know or not. But some people feel
empowered when they know because they
say, "Okay, I'm on it. I'm doing
everything. I'm not going to cheat at
all." And others say, "I'm going to
stress about it. It's going to make me
worse." But what I do know is the power
of the human spirit belief system and
body. We believe that we have a chance
and that's not called false hope.
>> In medicine, we're taught and you're
really frowned upon to give false hope.
I think we need to give more hope.
>> Oh gosh.
>> The minute you take that away, they're
they've given up.
>> Yes, Dr. Denise, I could not agree more.
And which brings up in my mind the
biology of belief. Dr. Bruce,
>> right? But Bruce Y.
>> Yeah. The power, our own powers are so
vast. We've been experiencing I think
that the placebo effect it gets bigger
and bigger compared to like where it was
20 30 years ago and it still gets
maligned instead of really looking at
this. It's amazing, right? It's so
funny. I used to be in pain management
before before oncology and we would sit
there with the medications coming
through. The rep would come through and
show us these things and it would be all
the placebo was almost always all almost
always right there next to or just under
the drug and we're like why would we
want the side effects in the drug? And
the placebo is real. And that's what I
tell patients. It's not something
floating out there that it's a hopeful
thing. Placebo is real. Why is it real?
Because if you believe something is
going to help you, you activate your
body's own pharmacy because that's when
you're in parasympathetic. I'm in this
good space. That's when your body goes,
"Oh, let me release all the
neurochemicals, the hormones, all my
healers, my immune system because I'm
not surviving and running from the bear
at the moment. I have time to detox and
repair and clean." So you're activating
your own pharmacy and it's far stronger,
better, and less no side effects in the
right dosage at the right time. We can't
get that good. So in in any of the
things that we're doing, so your body's
pharmacy is the smartest best one and
therefore that belief system that
placebo is real and that's been studied.
We know that.
>> Yes,
100%. Dr.
There's something else. Oh yes. So we
talked a lot about the glucose
restriction. Cut the sugars out. But
what we about half an hour ago also
touched upon cancer also relies heavily
on glutamine for fuel and building
blocks. And there's research that shows
when you target both that it's even more
effective than either alone. Can you
tell us more about this? Do you know can
you share strategies that exist for
glutamine restriction whether dietary
pharmaceutical or other
>> sure yeah we know we have to target both
and so exercise helps but we also know
there's some molecules that Dr. Seaf
Freed and others have identified, but we
can't get those chemicals. We can't get
them yet in clinical practice. So, I
hate to even bring it up because I'll
just say it. One of those is Dawn D.
There are people trying to do it now.
They are having to get the chemical mix
it themselves. I think it's very
dangerous and very I don't think they
should be doing it, but we are looking
for more things. Now, bourberine has a
little arm there, a little research arm
there that might be helping block that.
We still need more research to to make
it definitive. So, berbering and stress
reduction, those are two things that I
do with almost everybody on that
glutamine glutamate. But here's
something I will bring up is that many
integrative clinics will do a lot of IVs
and there's a time and a place. I used
to do lots and whenever I was doing
those kinds of therapies and I think
they're very helpful and can be, but
they will almost always add in glutamine
and say, "Okay, let's add this in. It's
a good detox, but if you got a cancer
patient, you're feeding that pathway. I
don't we again, it's about education. As
we know, more will be definitive to say
that's an absolute no. But right now, in
my mind, it's already an absolute. We
shouldn't be adding that in at to cancer
patients. So, we are strug
researching hard trying to find more
blockers on that side. And Dr. Dr. Seed
in his clinic at Boston College. He's
really working hard on that side because
we know the glut the glutamine the glue
the glucose side. Metformin can help if
you're not getting there. If the diet
can't do it, we've got that one pretty
well managed. The other side we're still
working on. Yes, I'm excited to see what
results will be rendered from deeper
study into this and thank you for
sharing this. For now, Dr. Dr. Denise,
I'd like to shift gears slightly and
talk about your seven pillars of health
framework because I think all these
metabolic therapies, they're most
effective when they're really rooted in
a holistic foundation and you've
identified seven areas that are
absolutely crucial for radiant health.
Can you tell us about this framework,
how you develop it, and also about these
seven areas specifically? Yeah. So, you
know, we've been alluding to it is that
you have to treat the whole person. So,
when people come in, I say, "Listen, I
have to know everything about your
cancer. The hisytology, pathology, how
aggressive is it? I got to know your
cancer, but I have to know you. I have
to know your cells and you." And so, we
I identified these seven areas that I
think are critical. And so, it might be
fun. If you don't mind, we can go
through it quickly.
>> Sure.
>> We can dive deeper on another podcast,
but it's just a fun way. And it's a
selfch checkup. And I tell people the
best checkup you will ever get is the
one you do yourself because you can run
labs. You can go to a full body MRI and
you say, "Oh, I don't have cancer and no
tumors." You can't say you don't have
cancer just cuz we can't see tumors.
Some of these things are good, but it's
about how do you feel? Are you checking
in with yourself in these areas? And are
you fooling yourself? Are you just
thinking let me take more and more of
these supplements, these oral
supplements which many of them will
interact or not get absorbed which
you're well aware of which I know about
I don't know what you bring into your
podcast but the oral sprays and the
delivery systems are very interesting
and great. So I just say more is not
better and checking in. So the seven
areas are this and I'm going to have
your listeners quickly rate yourself on
a scale of 1 to 10. 1 to 10. Let's start
with sleep. Very important pillar. We
know sometimes with cancer patients,
they come to me because they have
insomnia and that's when I find the
cancer. Sometimes that's the first sign.
So sleep, if you're reg, you might be
wearing a wearable or you're getting
deep sleep, REM sleep. Again, you can't
100% rely on those because they're not
100% reproducible, reliable. They give
us information, but we can't just rely.
A one is you can't get to sleep, you
can't stay asleep. A 10 is you wake up
ready to go for eight hours. You have
deep restorative sleep. You have energy
throughout your day. That's probably
good sleep, right? So that that rate
yourself 1 to 10. Next is your body. And
I say it's beyond the weight and the
physique. If you're shaped like you're
shaped like your mother, you're not
going to change that very easily. We got
to learn to love our bodies no matter
what what is there. This is not a stat.
It's about are you happy with it? One,
you're weak and you're flabby. There's
thin skinny. There are people that are
very thin, but they're soft. That is not
good. No muscle mass. And you want to
get body composition analysis, all this.
But that's will be a one. You don't like
looking in the mirror and you're soft.
Number 10 is you love your body. It's
working and you're taking good care of
it. You're doing the things that you
need to do every day. If the worst you
can do is try to get 7,000 steps in,
then at least do that and then try to
get to the gym resistance and training
we're talking about. Next is bowel
movement. And I'm talking yes about your
poop. A normal poop about from your
wrist to your elbow. It's fairly long
and about as big a round as your wrist
in the middle of it. It should be a
medium brown color. It should be easily
passed. It should be formed into a log
and not smell really bad. So, a one is
stinky poo, short rabbit pellets, gooey,
or severely constipated. A 10 is you're
really so proud you can't even believe
that that was expelled from your body
because you're like, where could that
have been? That's more than you think it
could have been. So, that one you want
almost want to show somebody like, wow,
look at that. You're proud of it. And
that's a great way of checking your
microbiome and all kinds of parameters
and health that we look at. And we need
to spend more time on digestion and
teaching people look at your poo.
Important.
Next one is energy. You're ready to go
in the morning without coffee. Now, I'm
not against coffee. I think it has a lot
of good benefits. A lot of people can do
really well with it. Some don't, but
some do. But if you're not crashing in
the afternoon at the end of the day. So,
a one is you're you wake up tired,
you're dragging all day, and then you
can't get to sleep at night. That's
called wired
and tired. Okay, that's wired and tired.
A 10 is I use my dad as an example. He's
91 now. He golfs 18 holes at least three
or four times a week. He goes to the gym
and strength trains probably four or
five times. And he's dancing most
nights. and he got caught skinny dipping
because he went to of some spa thing
with a one of the women in his life,
another sign of longevity. And he they
got caught because they forgot their
swimsuits. They waited till everybody
went to bed. They got in this natural
hot springs, got too hot, laid down to
cool off and fell asleep and got caught.
That is the way we're supposed to age.
Well, that's the way. Yeah. So if you
when people say I'm getting older or I'm
40 or I've got kids, that age thing is
never an excuse. Yeah.
>> For having good energy. So next is the
mental state and that includes how clear
are you thinking, your cognition, your
wiring and firing, your thinking through
and your creativity is there, your
focus, your memory. Are you having
trouble with word retrieval? Sometimes
if you get a bad night's sleep, you
might have a day where you go, "Oh,
what's that person's name?" But that
should not be getting worse or happening
more often. So a one is you really have
trouble with any of those things. And
more importantly, they're getting worse.
We need to pay attention. Let's find is
it inflammation of the brain? What's
causing it? And 10 is you really you're
creative. Your memory is good long-term
and short term and you're able to have a
pretty good recall of things. Next is
relationships.
>> Do you have a strong support system? We
know that by studies those people who do
live longer one if you don't have any
family you don't have friends you don't
have colleagues at work no and you just
feel really alone and secluded but also
in relationships I include intimacy
>> because whether you have a partner or
not you still need to be intimate with
yourself you need to touch in with the
sexual part of your body you need to
keep that active and alive in whatever
form that needs to be for you. But that
is a part of having a relationship with
yourself and we need to start talking
more about that and attend. You've got a
great tribe of people around you and
you're having great sex. That's it.
>> Last one not least, most important is
the spiritual health and that's the
ability to feel connected, have a deep
sense of gratitude and serenity. the
ability to unplug, let go. Where we
started this podcast, being able to have
a process that you can do that lets you
connect to the divine, whatever you say,
God, spirit, whatever that is, to be
able to connect where nothing really
matters. And I tell my cancer patients,
when you get to the point that you're
not afraid of cancer and you're not
afraid of death, that's when we see
spontaneous remissions because they get
to the point that they can connect that
they realize it's all going to be okay
no matter what. And that's important. So
one really find people around you go to
church, go to a meditation group, go to
yoga, find your tribe, listen to your
podcast which you're bringing in the
spiritual side to say we building these
kinds of communities are very important
and attend. We're not talking about
turning water into wine. It's the
ability to feel that sense of peace and
connectedness no matter what challenges
are coming on going on in your life.
I've had more in the last three days is
just you never say the words what else
because there's always another what
else, right? Never say that. That's
another tidbit to everybody. Just never
say what else. What comes to mind,
right, Na?
>> What? A shout out to our friend Jen,
Jennifer Hill who introduced us because
what she likes to say every day, you
probably know her mantra is she says,
"How can it get any better than this?"
>> That's right. That's right. She turns
that positive.
>> Yes. That positive. Here I am right now.
Crazy. You would say, I don't like your
word to say bad. I say challenging. How
can it get better? And in there. That's
part of that ability to go,
it's going to be okay and it can get
much better and what can I learn from
this? Whereas the empathy I might have
for others or some of the greatest
teachers I've ever had have been the
people that I would say I would use the
word betrayal,
>> right? That you trusted, you felt
betrayed. And they were some of my
greatest teachers. So we look back it's
hard to do it in the moment but looking
back to say it's all in a divine process
in time not because of karma because you
did something wrong people come in and
say did I get karma did I get cancer
because of karma I said I'm not a spir
I'm not I'm here as a guide mot
emotionally spiritually this and that I
can and I'd like to say that I am a
healer I'm a healer in a sense but I'm
more of a teacher to teach those to heal
themselves and to be able to get there
to those places. And so I it's just an
honor, really an honor to walk through
this with people. Like I said, I've got
professional athletes. It depends
whatever they're struggling with. But
these stage four terminal cancer
patients that come, it is a blessing and
an honor to watch their bravery and
their strength and their families
because if it's done, they become a
deeper person, a more person of more
ingratitude. And they actually say the
words, most of them, cancer is the best
thing that ever happened to me because
it woke me up to what is important and
let go of the stuff that's not. And
whether they die or not is not the
point. It's that they were awakened and
sometimes their family awakens with
them. And it's a beautiful to be able to
be part of that process.
>> That is truly incredibly beautiful and
profound. I actually feel my heart
opening as you said that. And this has
been such a rich and empowering
conversation, Dr. Denise. And you've
given us a completely different lens
through which to understand
health, understand cancer, not as a
genetic inevitability, but as a
metabolic disease with vulnerabilities
that we can address. We have agency. We
have power, whether it's diet,
lifestyle, repurposed medications, and
holistic support. And I also love that
you're not offering false promises or
miracle cures. You're offering
education, evidence, and empowerment
and hope. And you're also meeting from
what I gather from what you shared,
you're meeting your patients where they
are integrating these metabolic
approaches with the conventional care
when appropriate.
So thank you for all the incredible work
that you do, Dr. Donise, for people who
would like to connect with you, learn
more about you, connect with all the
incredible offerings you have out there.
How can they do so? First, I'm trying to
do better on that and I love being on
your podcast and others, but I would say
they can go to my website, drwardarden
rwn.com.
If they sign up for my newsletter, I do
a weekly newsletter that usually brings
something new to light hopefully for
them. I also am starting a monthly
program for those who want to ask. They
can't I can't give specific medical
advice, but we can talk through all of
these things because there's some people
who can't afford to work with me
oneon-one. And so, literally, that's to
be able to give back for the most part.
Giving back to say, "Let me help as many
people as I can." But I do still see
those that I think that I really feel
called to that I need to help. and
whether no matter what they're dealing
with, not just cancer, I have to feel
called because I've got to watch my time
and I want to make sure that I can do
it. But I will get give them the right
direction or who they could go to if I
think it's not a perfect or a right
timing fit for it. So they can follow me
that way. I'm starting to do a little
bit more social media. I'll try to do
better. Follow me on YouTube and all the
stuff. Those of us that do clinical and
research, it's hard for us to spend time
on that, but I will be doing better on
that. And I have a show coming up that
we'll talk about at some point, the
health hot seat show. And that's going
to be fun where we're hearing both sides
at once.
>> I'm very excited about that. And as
always, we're going to put all the
resources, all the links in the show
notes. So, it's just one click away for
whoever wishes to learn more and
connect. Dr. Denise, what a pleasure. I
am so glad we got to connect today. Much
gratitude to you
>> and also to you for everything that
you're doing. You've got a quality
podcast and what you're doing is what
you just said that I'm trying to do.
Let's give the reality as much as we can
with hope and a beautiful sense that we
are powerful human beings.
>> Superhumanize.
Accelerated evolution.